.Dd July 9, 2023
.Os
.Dt LC 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm lc
.Nd list directory contents custom-classified-colorfully
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Bk -words
.Op Fl OPTIONS..
.Op Fl -
.Op Cm PATHS..
.Ek
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
lists directory contents like
.Xr ls 1
in a filtered, sorted, tabular way, but with idea factoring tuned towards
user definability.
.Nm
ships with configuration files which may serve as a starting point.
.Pp
There are several specification nano-languages with terse codes { like
.Xr printf 3
.Xr strftime 3
.Xr find 1
.Xr stat 1
} that drive things.  Though the source code will always be the best reference,
not everyone has time to learn both Nim & bespoke nano-langs.  \fBlc --help\fP
is a quick reference.  This present page details more.  More background and
screen shots are available at: github.com/c-blake/lc
.Sh "OPTIONS (AKA FLAGS)"
Defaults are in () except for boolean flags which all default to false.
It is not expected that you will often/ever issue more involved options like
\fB--kind\fP, \fB--color\fP & \fB--ageFmt\fP interactively.  Rather they will
be in a config file, but options syntax unifies with such.
.Ss "File typology / taxonomy"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It Sy "-k=, --kind=" ( Em "{}" ) Em "[TYPE-NAME-BINDINGS/DEFINITION STRINGS]"
where each string is: \fBNAME RELATION PARAMS\fP with 3 or more fields are
whitespace-separated and:
.Bl -tag -width "asciiChars | cset" -compact -offset indent
.It Em RELATION
PARAMS
.It Em asciiChars | cset
param=str of chars base name can have
.It Em Suffix | SFX
case-sensitive base name suffixes
.It Em suffix | sfx
case-insensitive base name suffixes
.It Em Prefix | PFX
case-sensitive base name prefixes
.It Em prefix | pfx
case-insensitive base name prefixes
.It Em perlRx | pcr
Perl-Compatible Regexes match base name
.It Em uid
numeric uids of file owners
.It Em gid
numeric gids of file file owners
.It Em user
exact string user names for file owners
.It Em group
exact string group names for file owners
.It Em magic | mag
pcRes matching a
.Xr libmagic 3
description 
.It Em extension | ext
parameter \fBX.so:FUNC\fP applied to paths != 0
.It Em any
matches any one of listed kind names
.It Em all
matches all one of listed kind names
.It Em none
matches no listed kind names
.El
BUILTIN TYPE \fBNAME\fRs:
.Bl -tag -width worldWritable -compact
.It Em regular
Is a regular file
.It Em directory
Is a directory
.It Em blockDevice
Is a block device special file
.It Em charDevice
Is a character device special file
.It Em fifo
Is a FIFO / named pipe special file
.It Em socket
Is a Unix domain socket special file
.It Em symLink
Is any symbolic link special file
.It Em -symLink
Is a symLink pointing to a missing file
.It Em +symLink
Is a symLink pointing to a present file
.It Em hardLinks
Non-(dir|symLink) file with hard link count > 1
.It Em executable
File is executable non-(dir|symLink)
.It Em suid
Is setuid & executable
.It Em sgid
Is setgid & executable
.It Em tmpDir
Is a directory with sticky bit set (like /tmp)
.It Em worldWritable
world writable by user (but not sticky)
.It Em unReadable
unreadable (by user) file/untraversable dir
.It Em oddPerm
Has odd permissions: u+s & (!x | !reg), g+s & g-x, dir+t & !o+w, !(u >= g >= o), +w & -r
.It Em COMPRESSED
statx - has compressed attribute
.It Em IMMUTABLE
statx - has immutable attribute
.It Em APPENDONLY
statx - has append-only attribute
.It Em NODUMP
statx - has NoDump attribute
.It Em ENCRYPTED
statx - has encrypted attribute
.It Em CAPABILITY
Linux - has SOME Linux FS Capability
.It Em ACL
has some ACL
.El
\fBNOTE\fP: in config files / on the command-line, you may usually use \fIany
unique prefix\fP to refer to file kind names.
.El
.Ss "Formatting & Sorting"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It \fB-c=, --color=\fP ( \fI{}\fP ) Em RenderSpecificationStrings
each with syntax \fBNAME[:KEY[:SLOT[:ICON]]] ATTR ATTR..\fP where whitespace
amounts do not matter and:
.Bl -tag -width "NAME -" -compact -offset indent
.It Em NAME -
(as in --kind) | \fIsize{BKMGT}\fP | \fIperm{0-7}\fP
.It Em KEY -
optional 0..255 \fISORT/ORDER\fP key
.It Em SLOT -
optional format slot/dimension (for layers)
.It Em ICON -
optional UTF-8 icon string
.It Em ATTR -
color/text attr specs as in TEXT ATTRIBUTE section
.El
\fB--color\fP is really about more than colors.  It a meta-type specification
directive.  The \fIKEY\fP lets you decide where in \fB--order\fP a given kind
will fit as well as which slot is used for this kind \fINAME\fP.  E.g., you may
want to give "interface files" a lower integer \fIKEY\fP than "implementations",
if the alphabet swaps that (e.g. \fB.h\fP, \fB.c\fP).
.Pp
When might you want a different slot?  When some quality is "importantly"
independent of other qualities.  While typology is largely user-defined, a
simple example would be a primary dimension based on filename extensions or
based on i-node metadata.  Going further with this example, one slot is about
\fIhow you might\fP operate on a file and could be bound to many foreground
colors like media files one color, source code another, etc.  A second dimension
might then be permissions such as \fIwhether you are allowed\fP to operate.  You
can denote disallowed operation by \fBstruck\fP based on a file type test in an
independent slot.  In this way the independence of the input matches independent
layering of the output.  How much you can layer is very limited.
.Pp
\fIICON\fP should be self-explanatory and \fIATTR\fP is covered in the below
\fBTEXT ATTRIBUTE / COLOR SPECIFICATION\fP section.
.Pp
Besides text colors/attributes for file types, \fB--color\fR also lets you set
how certain value-dependent columns are rendered like file size & permissions
via \fIpseudo-type-names\fP like \fBsizeM\fP for size in megabytes or \fBperm5\fP
for the octal code indicating "r-x" permissions.
.It Sy "-a=, --ageFmt=" ( Em "{}" )   Em FileAgeFormatStrings
each with syntax: \fI<FileAge>@[-+]<STRFTIME_FMT|HumanDuration>\fP where:
.Bl -tag -width HumanDuration -compact -offset indent
.It Em FileAge
is {seconds | 'FUTURE' | 'ANYTIME'}
.It Em \&'+'
means the alternate format
.It Em '-'
means plain mode format
.It Em strftime
%CODEs are any strftime & %DIGIT
.It Em HumanDuration
is another way to format times -- relative to the time
.Nm
was run, divided by a unit number, and adorned by a unit string & attrs.
.El
Order can matter here; Arrange oldest to youngest.  E.g.,
\fB-a86400@%{purple}y%{blue}m%{cyan}d -a0@%{green}H%{yellow}M%{red}S\fP will
render file times older than 86400 seconds (1 day) in a "cooler" hue (blue side)
by date (%y%m%d) but younger files in a "warmer" hue by time of day (%H%M%S).
.Pp
\fIHumanDuration\fP is 3 space-separated columns: \fB/\fP\fIdivisor string
attrs\fP with the \fB/\fR indicating this format.  So, e.g.:
.nf
-a "+86400@/86400 <day cyan"
-a  "+6000@/3600  <hrs green"
-a   "+100@/60    <min yellow"
-a     "+0@/1     <sec red"
.fi
establishes units of seconds up to "99sec" before
.Nm
was run, then for earlier times 1-99min, then 1-23hrs, then days with the
hopefully obvious colors.  \fB<\fR means to left-pad/right-align the field.
.It \fB-o=, --order=\fP ( \fI''\fP ) [-]X[-]Y[-]Z... keys to multi-level sort files by.
See FORMAT & ORDER CODES section of this page for X,Y,Z,...
.It \fB-f=, --format=\fP ( \fI%f\fP ) "%X %{bold}Y %-Z .." dirent format; %-Z left-aligns.
See FORMAT & ORDER CODES section of this page for X,Y,Z,...
.It \fB-q, --quote\fP "" "" "" "" "" "" quote filenames with unprintable chars
.It \fB-e=, --ext1=\fP ( \fI''\fP )  %e output from x.so:func(qpath: cstr)->cstr
.It \fB-E=, --ext2=\fP ( \fI''\fP )  %E output from x.so:func(qpath: cstr)->cstr
.El
.Ss "Meta"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It \fB-C=, --colors=\fP (\fI{}\fP)   color aliases; Syntax: name = ATTR1 ATTR2..
.It \fB-S=, --Style=\fP (\fI''\fP)    DEFINE an output style arg bundle
.It \fB-s=, --style=\fP (\fI''\fP)    APPLY an output style
.It \fB-X=, --extra=\fP (\fI''\fP)    add params from config ARG where ARG means:
.Bl -tag -width ROOT// -compact -offset 2n
.It "\fIROOT\fP."
Load any \fB.lc\fP in the same dir as being listed
.It "\fIROOT\fP/"
Load any \fB.lc\fP in any parent dir of those listed
.It "\fIROOT\fP/."
Load \fB.lc\fP in the same dir as being listed (--recurse)
.It "\fIROOT\fP//"
Load \fB.lc\fP in parent dirs of those listed (--recurse)
.El
Useful values of \fIROOT\fP are either "." for paths relative to the dir being
listed (if you have durable write access, say).  You can make a partial shadow
of a dir-tree, though, and
.Nm
will look for \fB.lc\fP relative to an alternate root.  (Examples of non-durable
write access might be /usr/lib or /dev.)
.El
.Ss "Content Generation & Filtering"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It \fB-d, --dirs\fP            list dirs as themselves, not contents
.It \fB-r=, --recurse=\fP (\fI1\fP)   recurse N levels; 0 => unbounded
.It \fB-i=, --incl=\fP (\fI{}\fP)     kind \fINAME\fPs to include
.It \fB-x=, --excl=\fP (\fI{}\fP)     kind \fINAME\fPs to exclude
.It \fB-w=, --widest=\fP (\fI0\fP)    only list this many widest entries
in each column; 0 => do not filter.  This feature is useful to see if there are
a few files where renaming to shorter names would allow more columns.
.El
.Ss "Table Controls"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It \fB-n=, --nColumn=\fP (\fI999\fP) max major columns to use (each directory
entry occupies a "major" column while fields within it are "minor" columns).
.It \fB-1, --n1\fP              same as \fB-n1\fP; Mostly to have a long option
to bind short form \fB-1\fP commonly available in file listers.
.It \fB-P=, --padMax=\fP (\fI999\fP)  max spaces by which to pad major columns;
This space can help visually distinguish major from minor columns.
.It \fB-W=, --width=\fP (\fI0\fP)     override auto-detected terminal width;
E.g. --width=$((COLUMNS+5)) can do layout for a slightly wider terminal.  Useful
especially in combination with \fB--widest\fR.
.It \fB-D, --dense\fP           no blanks between multiple dir listings to
conserve terminal row space for blanks (often less needed with good highlighting
of directory types themselves).
.It \fB-u, --unzipF\fP          negate default all-after-%[fF] column zip which
happens by default to best support %f%r, %f%R, %f%L, etc. "overloading" of the
rightmost column with "optional" suffixes.  By using --unzipF these columns no
longer look optional, but get aligned like all the others.
.It \fB-H, --header\fP          add a row at start of data with col names since
with so many columns and numbers it can be easy to lose track.
.It \fB-t, --total\fP           print total KiB of listed before them in ancient
.Xr ls 1 long format listing tradition
.El
.Ss "Auto-Abbreviation"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It \fB-m=, --maxName=\fP (\fI''\fP) \fIAbbreviationSpecifier\fP where an
abbreviation specifier can be:
.Bl -tag -width "Number>0" -compact -offset indent
.It Em "aANYTEXT"
automatic - best unique same-location single-'*'
.It Em "Number>0"
=M - manual terminal-width M
.br
    [,head(M/2) - manual prefix length
.br
    [,tail(M-head+len(sep)) - manual suffix length
.br
    [,sep('*') - override separator, e.g. "..."
.br
    [,?chars]]]] - chars to be ?-escaped
.It Em "-2"
shortest unique prefix
.It Em "-3"
shortest unique suffix
.It Em "-4"
shorter of minimal prefix & suffix
.It Em "-5"
shortest 1-'*' anywhere glob with unique match
.It Em "-6"
shortest 2-'*' anywhere glob with unique match
.El
There is much flexibility since circumstances vary enough for any one idea to
fail badly.  Examples here might help, but images help more:
https://github.com/c-blake/lc#automatic-abbreviations .  The link at the end to
a bigger example may also help.
.Pp
"?-escaping" is AFAIK a term of my own invention.  Most shells let '?' match any
character in filenames, even shell meta-chars.  So, assuming a unique match
(which
.Nm
abbreviation often ensures), one way to suppress the shell syntax effect of a
shell-meta chars is to use '?' instead - hence "?-escaping".  I.e., if shell
magic TAB / auto-expand is on, you should be able to copy-paste unique globs,
hit <TAB> and see just one match, at least if the PWD is the same as what
.Nm
is rendering for.  (You needn't expand before use in commands.  That is just a
way to describe things.)
.It \fB-M=, --maxTgt=\fP (\fI""\fP) \fIAbbreviationSpecifier\fP for symLink targets; No auto
.It \fB-U=, --maxUnm=\fP (\fI""\fP) \fIAbbreviationSpecifier\fP for user names
.It \fB-G=, --maxGnm=\fP (\fI""\fP) \fIAbbreviationSpecifier\fP for group names
.It \fB-F, --reFit\fP   expand abbrevs up to padded column widths.
Basically, abbreviate only to the extent it helps a table have fewer columns.
.El
.Ss "Miscellaneous"
.Bl -hang -width MM
.It \fB-g=, --glyph=\fP (
.Dq Em " -> "
) how to render arrow in %r/%R readlink formats
.It \fB-b, --binary\fP   %s formats use "binary metric"; I.e. K => size/1024,
M=size/1024/1024; Without this standard metric (\fI\,/1000\/\fP..) is used.
.It \fB-L, --deref\fP    dereference symLinks generally; This can help since
.Nm
can actually assign 2 types to every symLink.
.It \fB-l, --tgtDref\fP  fully classify \&%R formats on their own (to colorize
targets of symbolic links).
.It \fB-p, --plain\fP    render text without color escape sequences
.It \fB-A, --access\fP   use 3*access(2) not st_mode for RWX perms; This is
slower, but more precise especially for network filesystems.
.It \fB--hyperlink\fP    add hyperlinks
.It \fB--version\fP      print version and exit
.El
.Sh FORMAT & ORDER CODES
.Ss "SHARED codes for BOTH format AND order specs:"
.Bl -tag -width "pMMMMpermUGO" -compact
.It CODE HEADER
DESCRIPTION
.It Em "f    Nm"
file / path name
.It Em "F    Bs"
baseName
.It Em "s    SzDv"
human readable size | dev number (if block | char).  This is rounded with
a metric suffix (or pair of hex numbers) to only ever occupy 4 terminal
columns.
.It Em "K    Bk"
file blocks in 512 byte units
.It Em "n    N"
link count; number of hard links | subdirs
.It Em "u    uid"
numeric uid
.It Em "U    Usr"
user name string
.It Em "g    gid"
numeric gid
.It Em "G    Grp"
group name string
.It Em "p    permUGO"
rwxr-xr-x perms for user, group, other bit banks
.It Em "a|A  a|Atm"
access time: ~ time of last read(2) to file
.It Em "m|M  m|Mtm"
modify time: ~ time of last write(2) to file
.It Em "c|C  c|Ctm"
create/change status time: ~ mtm for most file metadata
.It Em "v|V  v|Vtm"
version time = max(c, m)
.It Em "b|B  b|Btm"
birth time (~ when blocks first allocated for i-nodes)
.It Em "i    inode"
i-node number
.It Em "k    BkZ"
st_blksize - "ideal" size for IO to the file
.It Em "D    Mj"
major dev number
.It Em "d    Mn"
minor dev number
.It Em "o    %o"
%allocated byte range occupied by data blocks
.El
.Ss "FORMAT ONLY 1-letter codes:"
.Bl -tag -width qMMMMpermUGO -compact
.It Em "r    ln"
readlink(2) output aka link target
.It Em "R    Ln"
like 'r' but with colorized target
.It Em "Z    SecLab"
selinux label
.It Em "S    ByDv"
size in bytes | dev number (if block | char); Overloading this column is ancient
file listing tradition.
.It Em "P    perm"
Colored, Octal Perms
.It Em "q    permUGO"
rwx perms with space separators
.It Em "Q    A"
\'+\' if a file has an ACL
.It Em "l    l"
ls-KindCode(dl-..)
.It Em "L    L"
ls-KindCode(*/@\|=)
.It Em "e    e1"
Output of External Program 1
.It Em "E    e2"
Output of External Program 2
.It Em "x    LinExA"
6 column mask of statx extended attributes:
.Bl -tag -width " M " -compact -indent
.It Em " C "
Compressed
.It Em " I "
Immutable
.It Em " A "
Append Only
.It Em " N "
No Dump
.It Em " E "
Encrypted
.It Em " . "
RESERVED
.El
.It Em "@    I"
Icon (4th :-sep Col Of --color spec)
.It Em "0-8  D0-8"
User-defined format components 0-8; See CONFIGURATION
.It Em "9./  L0-2"
User-defined format components 0-2 for symLink target
.El
.Ss "ORDER ONLY 1-letter codes:"
.Bl -tag -width CODE -compact
.It CODE
DESCRIPTION
.It Em e
shortest file name (e)xtension; LAST '.' -> END of name
.It Em E
longest file name (E)xtension; FIRST '.' -> END of name
.It Em N
(N)umeric File Name
.It Em L
file Name (L)ength 
.It Em A
(A)bbreviated File Name
.It Em 0-2
file kind order Components 0-2
.It Em 3-5
file kind id Components 0-2
.It Em 6-8
symLink target order Components 0-2
.It Em 9./
symLink target file kind Components 0-2
.El
.Sh "TEXT ATTRIBUTE / COLOR SPECIFICATION"
.Ss "Basic SGR/Font Attributes"
\fIplain\fP, \fIbold\fP, \fIitalic\fP, \fIunderline\fP, \fIblink\fP, \fIinverse\fP, \fIstruck\fP, \fINONE\fP
.Ss "Basic Foreground Colors"
\fIblack\fP, \fIred\fP, \fIgreen\fP, \fIyellow\fP, \fIblue\fP, \fIpurple\fP, \fIcyan\fP, \fIwhite\fP
.Ss "Basic Background Colors"
An \fIon_\fP prefix implies using this color as the BACKGROUND color.
.Pp
So, for example, \fBbold white on_red\fP specifies what it sounds like -- bold
font white foreground text with a dark red background.
.Ss "High Intensity Colors"
UPPERCASE of the same names implies the HIGH intensity bank (for either fore- or
background colors).  Fewer terminals support this.  SGR codes are, respectively,
9x & 10x with x in [0,7] (for fore- & background).  E.g., \fBYELLOW on_red
italic\fP means render bright yellow on dark red text with italic font.
.Ss "256-color xterm Colors"
256-color xterm attrs are \fI[fb][0..23]\fP for FORE/BACKground grey scale &
\fI[fb]RGB\fP a 6x6x6 color cube; each [RGB] is on [0,5].  So, \fBf123 b20 blink\fP
means blinking red 1/5, green 2/5, blue 3/5 text on a gray 20/23 background.
.Ss "xterm/st/kitty true colors"
xterm/st/kitty true colors are \fI[fb]HHHHHH\fP (usual R,G,B mapping).  E.g.,
\fBwhite underline b081830\fP is underlined white text on Red=0x08=8/255,
Green=0x18=24/255, Blue=0x30=48/255.
.Ss "Where these can be used"
While \fB--color\fP values are the primary use case, field & strftime formats
both accept \fI%{ATTR..}CODE\fP.  E.g., \fBlc -f '%{inverse}f'\fP will list
directory entries with whatever other colorization they would have had, but with
whatever your terminal maps color inversion to overlaid.
.Sh CONFIGURATION / CUSTOMIZATION
.Nm
is more an "ls construction toolkit" than most similar programs.
.Pp
Little is hard-coded, but one exception is that the leftmost column is always
left-aligned.  This is to prevent empty columns in some rows for other tools
that split on repeated whitespace but do not collapse newline->non-white space.
For this reason you may want formats to start with naturally left aligned or
fixed width fields, such as %P.
.Sh "EXIT STATUS"
.Nm
exits with a status which is the max of 127 (the biggest non-signal exit code
on Unix) and the number of OS errors encountered collecting data (such as files
being removed after readdir but before stat).
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width XDG_CONFIG_HOME
.It Ev CLIGEN
The path to the config file or directory for cligen CL framework configuration.
This can tune \fI--help\fP colorization, layout, and content as well as a few CL
syntax variations such as whether long options require unique prefixes or being
fully spelled out.
.It Ev LC_CONFIG
If set, this is a path to a Nim std/parsecfg configuration file or directory
containing parameters processed by every invocation of
.Nm .
If compiled with \fI-d:cgCfgToml\fP the format of this file is TOML, but you
must first have installed github.com/NimParsers/parsetoml somewhere in your \fInim
c --path:SEARCH\fP.  If a directory, \fB$LC_CONFIG/config\fR is the config file.
.It Ev XDG_CONFIG_HOME
XDG directory for configuration files; ~/.config is a common choice.
\fB$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/lc\fP is used if \fBLC_CONFIG\fP is unset.
.It Ev HOME
Users home dir used as a fallback parent for ~/.config if neither
LC_CONFIG nor XDG_CONFIG_HOME are set.
.It Ev LC
Additional command parameters for every invocation
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ls 1 .
Full
.Nm
documentation is linked off of github.com/c-blake/lc
.Sh HISTORY
Ideas relating to this program date back to a circa 2000 Python script system
(largely user-definable via environment variables containing lambdas) that was
too slow.  It later became a long, ugly C program & then a Nim program, partly
as a way to drive feature development in cligen (like the --Style system).
.Sh BUGS
Probably.  Please report on Github.
